JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: In
their first
public hearing, senators slam
Russia for interfering
in the election, as the ranking
Democrat on
the House Intelligence Committee
says White
House actions raise profound
questions.
Then: North Carolina lawmakers
reach a compromise
to repeal the controversial bill
on transgender
bathroom use, but LGBT
supporters denounce
the deal.
And teaching kids the value of a
dollar -- why
parents should try giving money
lessons early
on.
BETH KOBLINER, Personal Finance
Expert: By
age 3, children can understand
basic money
concepts like exchange, or we
have to make
choices, or things have a value.
And those
conversations are important to
start when
kids are really little.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia's election
season meddling
dominated the conversation on
both ends of
Pennsylvania Avenue today.
On Capitol Hill, the Senate
Intelligence Committee
held its first public hearing on
the issue.
Meanwhile, the White House says
it's invited
the heads of both congressional
Intelligence
panels to view new material from
the National
Security Council. That came
after The New
York Times reported that two
White House officials
helped to provide House
Intelligence Chair
Devin Nunes view surveillance
reports.
That committee's top Democrat,
Adam Schiff
of California, says the
situation raises profound
concerns.
REP. ADAM SCHIFF (D),
California: We look
at these kind of issues all the
time. This
is not new for our committee,
which is why
it makes so unusual, irregular
that it would
be presented to us in this way.
This is within our ordinary
wheelhouse. There
is a proper way to put this
before the committee.
That certainly was not followed
here. And
the White House ought to explain
why that
wasn't followed here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will hear more
from the
Senate Intelligence Committee
hearing later
in the program.
In the day's other news:
President Trump took
public aim at some conservative
Republicans
who helped sink the GOP's
Obamacare replacement.
He tweeted that -- quote -- "The
Freedom Caucus
will hurt the entire Republican
agenda if
they don't get on the team. We
must fight
them."
Later, one of the members of
that caucus,
Michigan Representative Justin
Amash said:
"Most people don't take well to
being bullied."
For his part, House Speaker Paul
Ryan said
he empathizes with the
president.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
I understand the president's
frustration.
I share frustration. About 90
percent of our
conference is for this bill to
repeal and
replace Obamacare, and about 10
percent are
not. And that's not enough to
pass a bill.
We're close.
What I'm encouraging our members
to do is
to keep talking with each other
until we get
the consensus to pass this bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
later called
out three representatives by
name. In another
tweet, he called on Mark Meadows
of North
Carolina, Ohio's Jim Jordan, and
Idaho's Raul
Labrador to -- quote -- "get on
board."
Meanwhile, Kansas Governor Sam
Brownback today
vetoed a bill that would've
expanded Medicaid
in his state. He said it would
burden Kansas
with what he called
unrestrainable entitlement
costs.
A federal judge in Hawaii has
extended his
order blocking President Trump's
revised travel
ban. The Department of Justice
says it's considering
its next steps.
The Trump White House also today
announced
the departure of a top aide.
Deputy Chief
of Staff Katie Walsh was a close
ally of the
chief of staff, Reince Priebus.
Officials
said this does not signal that
more departures
are around the corner.
Congress narrowly passed a bill
today that
allows states to cut funds to
Planned Parenthood
and other abortion providers.
Vice President
Pence was called on to cast the
tie-breaking
vote in the Senate after two
Republican women
senators broke with their party
and voted
no, Maine's Susan Collins and
Alaska's Lisa
Murkowski.
The U.S. and Turkey struggled
today over the
role of Kurdish forces in
fighting the Islamic
State group. Turkey wants the
U.S. to partner
with its military, but the
Pentagon has backed
Syrian Kurdish troops.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
was in Ankara
today, and said the countries
see eye-to-eye
on fighting ISIS, also known as
Da'esh.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: There
is no space between Turkey and
the United
States in our commitment to
defeat Da'esh.
These are not easy decisions.
There are difficult
choices that have to be made.
So, this has been very good. The
conversations
today were very frank, very
candid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tillerson is set
to attend
a meeting of NATO foreign
ministers in Brussels
tomorrow.
President Trump has given the
military more
authority to go after al-Qaida
linked militants
in Somalia. The move means that
the Pentagon
can conduct more aggressive
airstrikes. It
also allows U.S. special forces
to accompany
the Somalian army.
Israel's Security Cabinet has
approved that
country's first new housing
settlements in
the Palestinian territory in two
decades.
The White House has expressed
concerns about
settlement activity. But after
today's announcement,
the White House said that Israel
has made
it clear that it will adopt a
policy that
takes President Trump's concerns
-- quote
-- "into consideration."
In South Korea, ousted President
Park Geun-hye
has been arrested on corruption
charges. She
faces allegations of colluding
with a friend
to extort money from businesses.
Park was
questioned for nearly nine hours
before a
court in Seoul granted her
arrest warrant.
They cited concerns that she may
try to destroy
evidence.
Stocks moved higher on Wall
Street today,
led by gains in the banking
sector. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
69 points
to close at 20728. The Nasdaq
posted a record
close, rising more than 16, and
the S&P 500
added nearly seven.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the Senate
sets its sights on Russian
election meddling;
North Carolina repeals a
controversial law
on transgender bathroom use;
veteran lawmakers
analyze how President Trump is
shaping the
U.S. role in the world; and much
more.
We return to the U.S. Senate,
where the focus
today centered on Russia, from
the very real
threats of fake news stories to
rules for
engagement in a cyber-war.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R), Florida:
Aren't we in
the midst of a blitzkrieg, for a
lack of a
better term, of informational
warfare conducted
by Russian trolls under the
command of Vladimir
Putin?
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was a rare
public hearing
into Russia's meddling in last
year's presidential
election. Both Senate
Intelligence Committee
leaders, Republican Richard Burr
and Democrat
Mark Warner, made clear that
they wanted to
avoid the partisanship that's
plagued their
House counterparts'
investigation.
SEN. RICHARD BURR (R), North
Carolina: We
must engage in a
whole-of-government approach
to combat Russian active
measures.
SEN. MARK WARNER (D), Virginia:
We simply
must, and we will, get this
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The experts
testifying before
the panel warned that anyone is
now vulnerable
to Russian interference.
Clint Watts is a former FBI
agent now with
the Foreign Policy Research
Institute.
CLINT WATTS, Foreign Policy
Research Institute:
Well, it's used right now
against people of
both sides. So, we will watch
them play both
sides. They might go after a
Republican person
in this room tomorrow, and then
they will
switch.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Watts spotlighted
how experts
say the Kremlin pushes fake news
and disinformation
to influence American opinions.
CLINT WATTS: They launch those
simultaneously
as they begin the engagement or
push of false
news stories, usually from R.T.
and Sputnik
News. They do that in
unison,which games the
social media system, such that
such a high
volume of content being pushed
at the same
time raises that into the trends
that you
will see if you looked at
Facebook or Twitter
whatever it might be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The former FBI
agent said a
part of the proliferation of
fake news was
because of what President Trump
says on Twitter.
REP. JAMES LANKFORD (R),
Oklahoma: There is
much more engaging this time in
our election.
Why now?
CLINT WATTS: He claimed that the
election
could be rigged. That was the
number one theme
pushed by R.T., Sputnik news,
white outlets
all the way up until the
election.
Part of the reason active
measure works -- and
it does today in terms of Trump
Tower being
wiretapped -- is because they
parrot the same
line. But until we get a firm
basis on fact
and fiction in our own country,
get some agreement
about the facts, whether it be
do I support
the intelligence community or a
story I read
on my Twitter feed, we're going
to have a
big problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former National
Security Agency
Director Keith Alexander said
these intrusions
are not just to influence
America's political
system, but to further Russian
interests abroad.
KEITH ALEXANDER, Former
Director, National
Security Agency: This is
widespread in a campaign
that they are looking at doing
that will drive
wedges between our own political
parties and
between our country and NATO,
and within NATO
and within the European Union.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Watts said,
because the U.S.
response has been so slow,
Russians have no
reason to limit their
intrusions.
CLINT WATTS: We have no
organized response
to a country or even a policy
towards Russia
right now. So, I think, until we
set the boundaries
about how we are going to either
push/pull
with them, they are going to
move as far as
they can pushing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Watts offered
his own recommendations
on how the U.S. can solve that
problem.
CLINT WATTS: We need a State
Department and
a DHS web site that immediately
refute when
falsehoods are put out.
Mainstream media companies,
we need to be working with them.
What if they
boycotted WikiLeaks
collectively? What if
they all didn't race to publish
too quickly?
If those damaging, stolen
information that
is misconstrued oftentimes
doesn't get into
the mainstream media, if all of
them block
it out, Russia's influence dies
on the vine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Senate
Intelligence Committee
is expected to hold more
Sessions on Russia's
influence in the coming weeks.
We're joined now by a member of
the Senate
Select Committee on
Intelligence. He is Ron
Wyden, Democrat of Oregon.
Senator Wyden, welcome back to
the program.
I'm going to ask you about that
hearing, but
first a quick question about
what is going
on, on the House side. And that
is the disclosure
today that it was White House
aides who provided
the House Intelligence Committee
chairman
or helped provide him with
surveillance reports
on the Trump campaign, Trump
transition.
And how do you see this
affecting the ability
of this investigation to go
forward?
SEN. RON WYDEN (D), Oregon:
Judy, I would
just say the new news in the
House of Representatives
is really bizarre.
And it seems to me the chairman
over there,
Mr. Nunes, really doesn't have
an ounce of
credibility left. From all that
we have been
able to gather, he has sort of
conveyed this
impression that this information
he got was
from something like a
whistle-blower, a real
independent intelligence source.
Now it really
looks like just plain old White
House spin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we also
learned today that
it was individuals close to the
president,
Steve Bannon, the president's
son-in-law,
Jared Kushner, who were backing
up these efforts,
apparently, by the National
Security Council.
SEN. RON WYDEN: I have heard
those press reports.
I can't -- can't confirm them.
And the fact is, Judy, in the
Senate, we had
a really pretty significant
hearing. You talked
about some of the
cyber-questions. I have
been concerned that the key to a
successful
investigation in both the House
and the Senate
is to follow the money.
Today, what we heard is, that
made sense,
but you also ought to follow the
trail of
dead bodies. For example, there
was a very
mysterious death that the press
was reporting
on, a KGB officer who was
associated with
the famous dossier. So, there
are a lot of
issues to dig into.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, do you
believe after this
hearing today on the Senate side
that you
are closer to understanding the
magnitude
of Russia's interference in the
election?
SEN. RON WYDEN: I think we have
to accelerate
the pace.
I have conveyed that to both the
chairman
and the vice chairman. Look,
there is a way
to be both professional and
convey a sense
of urgency. The two are not
mutually exclusive.
But the way the story is coming
out, it's
coming out through leaks, it's
coming out
through press reports, it's
coming out with
just false tweets by the
president of the
United States.
The American people are worried.
I think we
need to get the facts out, and I
think a lot
more needs to be done in an open
hearing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You referred,
Senator, to your
own push,.
You wrote a letter to the
chairman and the
ranking member of the Senate
Intelligence
Committee, urging them to look
into, as you
said, the financial
relationships between
President Trump and any Russian
officials.
Are they following up on that
advice, and
could that lead to obtaining or
trying to
obtain the president's tax
returns?
SEN. RON WYDEN: Not yet, Judy.
But I only sent them the letter
yesterday.
Look, the tax returns are a key
part of this.
And I'm the author of the
legislation Presidential
Tax Transparency Act, with 20
United States
senators, to require those
returns be made
public, because the returns are
really the
lowest ethical bar for a
president.
But there is a lot more to this.
We need to
make sure, both in the United
States and in
Russia, that we follow this
whole web of financial
transactions that can involve
the president,
it can involve his associates,
it can involve
his family. But we have got to
get to the
bottom of this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is the ultimate
goal here to
determine whether there was
collusion between
the Trump campaign and Russian
officials?
SEN. RON WYDEN: That's right at
the heart
of the agenda. And we could have
learned about
that, at least some information,
quite a bit
earlier.
When James Comey came to the
Intelligence
Committee for another open
hearing in January,
I asked him whether he was
following up on
connections between the
president and the
Russians. And he said he
wouldn't answer.
We just learned about that
recently.
So, the American people deserve
more information.
They deserve it in my more
timely way. And
that can be done without
compromising our
security interests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
Senator, are
you confident that that -- that
every effort
is being made both by
congressional committees
and by the investigations under
way at the
FBI and other government
agencies?
SEN. RON WYDEN: I can tell you
that it has
been very hard to excavate the
information
we need from the government
agencies.
I think both Senator Warner and
Chairman Burr
would agree on it. One of the
things that
is going to help is going to be
to have more
people, more staff people on
that case. And
we will have some more to say
about that down
the road.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Ron
Wyden, a member
of the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence,
we thank you.
SEN. RON WYDEN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, compromise
came to North
Carolina, on the heels of a
long-running political
controversy.
The state suffered a business
and economic
backlash from a law that many
saw as discriminatory.
North Carolina had lost out on
music concerts,
conventions and sporting events,
and was facing
a deadline of sorts from the
NCAA.
Hari Sreenivasan reports.
MAN: House Bill 142 is adopted.
HARI SREENIVASAN: With that,
North Carolina's
state legislature overwhelmingly
voted to
replace its so-called bathroom
bill. The new
bill was brokered by the state's
Democratic
Governor Roy Cooper and
Republican lawmakers.
GOV. ROY COOPER (D), North
Carolina: Today,
we repeal House Bill 2 and we
begin to end
discrimination in North
Carolina.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ahead of the
vote, members
be both sides said they were
ready to move
on.
SCOTT STONE (R), North Carolina
State Representative:
The time has come for us to get
out from under
the national spotlight for
negative things.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still, critics
both inside
and outside the chamber and said
the measure
is no compromise at all. The new
bill repeals
last year's law, which, among
other things,
required transgender people use
public bathrooms
according to their gender at
birth. But it
leaves the Republican-dominated
state legislature
in charge of setting future
policy on bathroom
use.
And it continues to bar local
municipalities
from passing their own
nondiscrimination laws
on the issue until 2020.
GOV. ROY COOPER: I wish it were
sooner than
2020. I really do. But while
these additional
protections may be temporarily
delayed, they
will not be forever denied.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But several
Democrats and
LGBT advocates said those
provisions mean
the new legislation is simply a
repeal in
name only.
MAN: It kicks HB-2 down the road
to 2020,
keeping most of the awful law on
the books
for someone else to deal with.
This is not
about returning us to the status
quo. This
isn't about repealing HB-2. It
does neither
of those things.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Instead, they
argue, it's
designed to appease
organizations who boycotted
North Carolina, and not members
of the LGBT
community. Today's vote comes
after the NCAA
threatened to pull future
college sports tournaments
from the state through the year
2022 if it
didn't change the law.
The NCAA already had moved
championship games
to other states that were to be
played in
North Carolina this year.
Indeed, members
from both parties, including the
House's Democratic
leader, said the economic
implications can't
be ignored.
Still, others on the Republican
side decried
the new bill, and said the NCAA
was wielding
its influence inappropriately.
BEVERLY BOSWELL (R), North
Carolina State
Representative: I refuse to bow
to the NCAA's
dictates and demands. Thank you,
sir.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It remains to
be seen whether
the new bill will prompt
businesses and organizations
to end their boycott of the
state.
We get two takes now on today's
deal.
First, Darren Jackson is the
House minority
leader for the Democrats in
North Carolina.
He spoke in favor of it.
I talked with him a short time
ago and began
by asking why it was important
to ask today,
even if the bill wasn't perfect.
DARREN JACKSON (D), North
Carolina State Representative:
Well, the number one reason is
to get rid
of House Bill 2 and the stain
that it has
put on North Carolina as a
state, the economic
harm that it has done to the
state. We just
needed to move past that part of
it and start
making some steps forward.
And it was important to do that
now, before
more harm comes to the state.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You also noted
that the
NCAA, the ACC, the NBA, other
sporting events
might come back, and the ripple
effects it
has on all the service workers
that work at
these facilities.
A lot of critics even in the
legislature say
that you all are bending too
much to the will
of the NCAA, even heard one
assemblyman say
that perhaps you should replace
the flags
outside with the NCAA flag and a
white flag.
DARREN JACKSON: I'm not
repealing House Bill
2 because of pressure. We have
used the pressure
that has been brought to bear by
other organizations
and businesses to help us in our
calls to
repeal House Bill 2. So, I view
their pressure
as being helpful in the
situation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is it a
coincidence then
that it is happening on the day
where the
NCAA -- after we record this
interview, about
an hour or so after, they are
going to have
a press conference and they're
going to be
deciding whether or not the NCAA
comes back
to North Carolina over the next
few years?
DARREN JACKSON: Well, no, I
don't think it's
a coincidence at all.
The fact that they are making
these decisions
is what has driven the
Republicans finally
to the negotiating table, so
that we could
at least discuss this and try to
work out
a compromise.
HARI SREENIVASAN: LGBT groups,
even some of
your own members on the floor
today said that
this doesn't go far enough, that
it doesn't
offer statewide protection for
the LGBT community,
and, in fact, it even goes the
other way,
that it freezes local
jurisdictions from setting
up their greater protections
until 2020.
So isn't justice deferred
justice denied?
DARREN JACKSON: No, I mean,
those ordinances
were already frozen by House
Bill 2 permanently.
This provides a way forward
starting in 2020,
but also gives some relief
immediately to
municipalities who want to do
these types
of protections in their
contracting with private
businesses that want to do
business in their
cities. So, this will allow the
cities to
make a big step forward now, but
even bigger
step forward come 2020.
And, of course, you know, that
puts a lot
of pressure on the Democrats in
the General
Assembly to pick up seats in the
2018 election
and maybe move this process
forward, because
what North Carolina really needs
is statewide
protections.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The governor
also said that
this is not the last step; it is
the first
step.
So, what is next? What else can
you do to
try to ensure that this
community is protected?
DARREN JACKSON: Well, like I was
talking about
elections, we need to win more
seats. We are
in a superminority. So, I can
file any bill
I want to file, but it's not
going to get
heard.
So, we need to take back a
chamber of the
General Assembly, and then we
can introduce
bills to push statewide
protections. But the
conversation has been started.
There is no
putting that genie back in the
bottle. I mean,
businesses may return to North
Carolina, but
they're going to keep the
pressure up for
North Carolina to continue to
make steps forward
and allow people to be free from
the discrimination
in employment and public
accommodations.
And we support that and we will
be fighting
with them right along. We just
thought it
was important to take a
compromise that we
could get it now to get rid of
House Bill
2, so we could take that step
forward. Even
if it is a small step forward,
and not as
big a step as many people would
have liked
to take, we have gotten rid of
House Bill
2. And that is the most
important thing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Darren
Jackson, Democratic
Assembly minority leader in
North Carolina,
thanks so much.
DARREN JACKSON: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Multiple civil
right groups,
especially in the LGBTQ
community, blasted
this compromise.
Cathryn Oakley is the senior
legislative counsel
with the Human Rights Campaign.
I spoke with her from Raleigh.
And I asked
what she found wrong with the
deal.
CATHRYN OAKLEY, Human Rights
Campaign: Unfortunately,
the legislation that passed
today was the
result of a backroom deal that
was done without
the consultation of the LGBTQ
community or
other civil rights communities.
And that was put together by the
governor
and Republican leadership. And
they call it
a compromise. They call it a
repeal. But,
unfortunately, what it is, is
simply doubling
down on the kind of
discrimination that brought
HB-2 to North Carolina in the
first place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is it better
that what was
on the books?
CATHRYN OAKLEY: Well, HB-2 is
the most egregious
anti-LGBT law that has been
passed into law
in any state in the country. It
was an incredibly
egregious law that was very
harmful.
Unfortunately, what really we
needed to have
happen today, with all of the
pressure that
came from today's impending NCAA
deadline,
where the NCAA is going to
announce where
they are going to be awarding
games through
2022, what needed to be done
with that pressure
was a full repeal of HB-2.
That is what the LGBTQ community
needs and
has been demanding for more than
a year now.
And, instead, what we got was
something that
continues to discriminate
against LGBTQ people
and continues to box LGBTQ
people out of getting
meaningful nondiscrimination
protections.
In fact, there are will
essentially be no
nondiscrimination protections at
all for at
least four years. And even then,
what will
be allowed will be very limited
and devoid
of meaning for particularly
transgender people.
So, it is very problematic that,
instead of
working with all of the pressure
that was
generated, working with the LGBT
community,
that, instead, the governor and
leadership
chose to go down this path that
continues
to perpetuate discrimination.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The governor
said today
-- he sort of laid out the
political reality
of the landscape and said that
this is a legislature
that is a supermajority, not in
his party.
And, as I heard, and as you
probably did in
several floor speeches, there
are lots of
members of the legislature who
hear from constituents,
an overwhelming majority, who
don't even want
HB-2 repealed.
So, what do you do in that
context? Was this
the possible vs. the goal or the
ideal?
CATHRYN OAKLEY: Yes.
Well, you are absolutely right
that there
is a Republican supermajority.
And that is
how HB-2 came about in the first
place, was
that the Republicans decided
this was a thing
that they were doing, and they
did it.
But the truth is, in terms of
political reality,
as you say, there are folks in
the Republican
Caucus who didn't want to repeal
HB-2. And
so despite the fact that they
had a supermajority,
these folks were advocating for
HB-2 to stay
on the books because they
thought it was a
good law.
What that meant was, in order to
pass anything,
they needed to get Democratic
support. And
what we really needed to have
happen was for
the governor, who is someone who
the LGBTQ
community worked very hard to
get elected,
someone who many people put
their hope in
as being someone who would help
repeal HB-2
and help protect the LGBTQ
community, that
instead of standing up for full
appeal and
saying that the only thing that
Democrats
will stand for is a full repeal,
is the end
of this incredibly
discriminatory and unprecedented
law, instead of saying that is
the only thing
Democrats would support, he
continued to negotiate.
And, unfortunately, what we
wound up with
was something that, as I say,
unfortunately
continues to perpetuate the
discrimination
that HB-2 brought to North
Carolina in the
first place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Cathryn Oakley
of Human Rights Campaign, thanks
so much.
CATHRYN OAKLEY: It's my
pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: part two of
our series
War on the Brain.
Tonight, special correspondent
Soledad O'Brien
reports from North Carolina on
the difficulty
in diagnosing PTSD and how that
complicates
treatment.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL RODRIGUEZ
(RET.), U.S.
Army: Sometimes, it's fear.
Sometimes, I'm
scared of -- of everything.
Sometimes, I feel
sad. Sometimes, I feel
overwhelmed. The biggest
trigger I have is myself.
I don't like the way I smell. I
frequently
bathe, at least four or five
times a day.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: After years of
denial, Michael
Rodriguez has finally found ways
to deal with
the symptoms of his
post-traumatic stress
disorder. He's a retired special
forces Green
Beret. He forges steel to help
him manage
the often gruesome memories that
flood his
thoughts.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: It's so
physical, it requires a lot of
force and heat
and intensity. I'm facing and
processing a
lot of the stuff that I
remember. The pain
goes away. I'm forging myself.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Why does that
make you emotional?
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: Because
I get passionate about it,
because it means
a lot to me.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: For four years,
Michael misled
doctors about his PTSD, fearing
he would lose
his job. He minimized his
symptoms for this
PTSD checklist used to diagnose
all veterans,
like question one: Are you
bothered by repeated,
disturbing and unwanted
memories?
Question four: Were you bothered
by feeling
very upset when something
reminded you of
the stressful experience? There
is no concrete
diagnostic test that would have
forced him
to get treatment.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: If there
was an actual test, like a hard
copy test,
as opposed to...
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: So, like
something tangible.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: Yes, because
when you have that, you will
remove the human
element out of the diagnoses.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Undiagnosed,
but the damage
was done. In 21 years of service
in the Army,
Michael was deployed nine times,
from Operation
Restore Hope in Somalia to
Operation Enduring
Freedom in Afghanistan.
During that lifetime of service,
he was rattled
by frequent small explosions,
and, Michael
guesses, at least a dozen very
severe blasts.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: They were
significant enough to where I
had my bell
rung. I could feel it through my
whole body,
felt numb, some memory issues,
dizziness definitely,
vomiting.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: In 2006,
driving in a convoy
on patrol in Afghanistan, the
vehicle in front
of him was hit by an IED.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: It threw
the ATV I was on, four-wheeler,
kind of pushed
through it, and threw me. I
couldn't see out
of my left eye. I had really the
worst headache
I have ever had in my life.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The blast gave
Michael permanent
double vision. Today, he wears a
tinted prosthetic
lens in his left eye to correct
it. He also
suffered massive daily
headaches, slurred
speech and balance problems. He
was left with
emotional scars as well.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: The wheels
were just coming off my wagon. I
was falling
apart. Anger issues. I was
drinking a lot.
I was trying to hide it. I would
-- I was
very moody.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: He knew he had
suffered multiple
brain injuries, but believed
he'd get better.
Eventually, Michael's commanders
forced him
to get help.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: And they
were like, and you have severe
post-traumatic
stress. And I -- I got upset.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: So why did PTS
upset you?
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: At that
time, I didn't think I had it.
Bought into
the stigma.
But if there was a tangible
test, I think
it would make it easier on the
patients, but
-- because it will validate it.
You know,
like if someone has leukemia, no
one ever
says, you don't have leukemia.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Right.
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: So, if there
was some, say, type of biomarker
or something
like that, yes, then I think it
would definitely
help.
DR. SAM MCLEAN, University of
North Carolina
at Chapel Hill: Yes, we're
really living in
the dark ages of post-traumatic
stress diagnosis.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Dr. Sam McLean
is a doctor
of emergency medicine and
anesthesiology at
the University of North Carolina
at Chapel
Hill.
He is one of a group of
researchers around
the country trying to nail down
a more specific
diagnosis of PTSD.
DR. SAM MCLEAN: We hope to
advance the diagnosis
of post-traumatic stress by
assessing what's
going on in the brain, not
simply a symptom
checklist, getting at the actual
biology that's
underlying those symptoms.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Researchers at
the University
of North Carolina are decoding
blood samples
taken from recent trauma victims
at civilian
emergency rooms. They're
sequencing genetic
material, RNA, DNA and other
types of molecules,
to identify biological markers
for PTSD.
DR. SAM MCLEAN: The blood is
such a valuable
tool to use to better understand
what's going
on with post-traumatic stress,
because, after
traumatic event, the brain
communicates with
the body via the blood.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: To find out how
PTSD physically
changes the brain, researchers
at the Veterans
Affairs Health Facility just
outside of Boston
are using MRIs to look at brain
structure
and volume, as well as
connectivity, to see
how different areas of the brain
talk to each
other.
DR. SAM MCLEAN: The goal that we
need to get
to is get to the point where
there is a certain
accurate molecular diagnosis
that we can make.
I'm hopeful that that is going
to happen within
our lifetime.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Kelly Rodriguez
is Michael's
wife. She's a platoon sergeant
with the 18th
Airborne Corps at Fort Bragg in
North Carolina.
She too suffers from PTSD. She
practically
had to beg her doctors to get an
accurate
diagnosis.
How many deployments have you
done in your
20-plus years?
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ,
U.S. Army:
Five.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What was your
most traumatizing
posting?
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
My last deployment.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: In Afghanistan.
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
In Afghanistan
2009 to 2010.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Kelly served as
a medic,
treating casualties from one of
the bloodiest
attacks on U.S. troops in
Afghanistan. Kelly
and her team saw hundreds of
trauma patients
go through the operating room
that year.
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
It's not just
engaging in combat. It's seeing
it. And when
you have soldiers come in, and
they're literally
holding their jaw because they
just got hit
in the face with a rocket, or an
NCO came
in, and he's holding his arm.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: One patient hit
her the hardest,
a female soldier who volunteered
for a convoy
so she could see her husband
before he shipped
out.
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
The convoy
was hit and -- by an IED.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: By an IED?
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
she was alive
when she got to us, but she
died. And her
husband was there. And I think
the reason
it was really hard is because,
if Michael
was downrange, I would have done
the same
thing. That could have been me.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: After returning
home, Kelly
suspected that she might have
PTSD, but trying
to get an accurate diagnosis was
a difficult
ordeal for her too.
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
It came down
to screaming. Find out if it is
PTS. Great.
If it's not, great. One way or
the other,
I need something, besides, you
have got anxiety
and you're depressed.
Well, you know, so does half of
America.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: It took more
than two years
before Kelly was finally
diagnosed with PTSD.
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
You can't
treat it if you don't put your
hands on it,
put a name on it. And that's
why, for me,
it was frustrating trying to get
any diagnosis.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: A shortfall
they both hope
science will someday resolve.
Will someone who is just
entering the military
10 years from now have a
completely different
experience, do you think, than
you both had?
SGT. 1ST CLASS MICHAEL
RODRIGUEZ: I hope there
is. That would be fantastic.
SGT. 1ST CLASS KELLY RODRIGUEZ:
Because, at
the end of the day, if there is
something
going on with them, they want to
know what
it is.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Soledad O'Brien in Fayetteville,
North Carolina.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Our series War on
the Brain
concludes Friday with a look at
the efforts
to find the true cause of PTSD.
President Trump promised often
during the
campaign to improve America's
standing across
the globe.
Now, more than two months in
office, Mr. Trump
has shaken up the world stage,
from dust-ups
with longtime allies to
continued questions
about Russia.
We examine the administration's
foreign policy
now with two veteran lawmakers
who helped
to shape U.S. national security,
former Republican
Senator Richard Lugar, and
former Democratic
Congressman Lee Hamilton, both
from Indiana.
They are now both distinguished
scholars at
Indiana University.
And welcome to the "NewsHour" to
both of you.
The New York Times reported
today -- and I
will start with you, Senator
Lugar -- that
the United States is expanding
-- expanding
and deepening its military
involvement in
the Middle East under President
Trump in Iraq,
in Syria, in Yemen. At the same
time, he's
calling for cutbacks in spending
on diplomacy.
What do you think of this
approach?
RICHARD LUGAR (R), Former U.S.
Senator: Well,
I believe the approach is very
fearful.
And we really need to have all
of our alliances
as strong as possible. I mean,
as a matter
of fact, to have a military
strategy for the
Middle East, as opposed to a few
troops that
are going here and there at
various times,
I'm really concerned about the
president's
lack of enthusiasm for NATO, for
example.
I'm worried about our -- even
the alliance
problems in our own hemisphere
with the NAFTA,
quite apart from those ties with
the Far East.
In other words, we need to reach
out, offering
leadership in the world. And we
need to be
finding new allies, new people
to help us.
The Middle East will not be
solved by a few
Americans who are sent over
there, even if
we augment that by a few more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Representative
Hamilton, your
take on the first two months of
this presidency
on foreign policy?
LEE HAMILTON (D), Former U.S.
Congressman:
Well, I agree very much with
what Dick said.
You need to have I a strong
military and be
prepared to use it on occasion
as a last resort.
But you certainly have to have
strong diplomacy.
Almost all of these problems
that we're dealing
with, I think all of them,
ultimately have
a political solution. You do not
get that
kind of a solution through
military action.
You get it through diplomacy,
negotiations,
consultations, endless meetings,
and conversations
of all kinds with your friends
and your enemies.
We need a strong diplomatic
effort in order
to advance our interests in the
world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, between the
two of you,
you served, I think, a total of
more than
-- of 70 years, between the U.S.
Senate and
the U.S. House.
Senator Lugar, what is it
exactly that you
would like to see the president
do when it
comes to diplomacy that he isn't
doing right
now?
RICHARD LUGAR: Well, first of
all, he needs
to indicate that we are not
going to cut the
budget of the State Department,
that we're
not going to cut foreign aid or
potential
assistance even to starving
people around
the world.
In other words, we really need a
burst of
enthusiasm for American
humanitarianism, American
reach-out to other countries and
other people.
We have those resources here.
They're tremendously
important.
And we are the leader. It won't
do really
just to augment the defense
budgets, while
you're cutting back foreign aid
and you're
cutting back on treaties. We
have already
seen the dissolution of the
Pacific pact.
That's a treaty for foreign
trade.
We are already seeing the
diminishing interest
of foreign trade generally by
the president,
a diminishing of Americans
accepting other
people coming into our country.
We really need to sort of
reverse these courses
and get back into American
leadership.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should
note that is
coming from a Republican.
Representative Hamilton, what is
the formula
that you see? What would you
like to see this
president do, say that we
haven't heard or
seen so far?
LEE HAMILTON: Look, I think
American leadership
in the world is absolutely
necessary.
I come from the school of
thought -- and I
think Dick does too -- that
American leadership,
though not perfect, we make
mistakes, is crucial
to progress in the world,
economic growth,
peace and stability, extension
of freedom
and liberty to all people.
You have to step forward and
take on that
burden of leadership. And that's
what the
president has to do. If you look
back over
the past hundred days or so of
the Trump administration,
all of the news has been
internal or external
problems of the Trump
administration.
He's having a very hard time
getting started
and exerting his authority as a
president
because of these internal and
some external
problems.
The world needs our leadership
in all kinds
of ways. And we have to step up
to that responsibility.
And, if we do not do it, then
others will
fill the vacuum. We have a
marvelous record
of global leadership over
decades since World
War II. We have got a -- we see
signs now
that that leadership may be
waning in some
respects.
And we have to step up our game,
assert our
leadership. And President Trump
has to take
the lead on that, so that the
United States
can fulfill the expectations of
the world
for our leadership for good
around the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two distinguished
American
lawmakers, Representative Lee
Hamilton, Senator
Richard Lugar.
It's very good to see both of
you again. We
thank you.
RICHARD LUGAR: Thanks so much.
LEE HAMILTON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: teaching the
youngest
of kids about the basics of
money.
Our economics correspondent Paul
Solman looks
at how parents can help their
children learn
more about personal finance.
It's part of his series Making
Sense, which
airs every Thursday.
CHILD: Maybe there's some candy
in there.
PAUL SOLMAN: In Arlington,
Virginia, an unusual
venue for little kids.
BETH KOBLINER, Personal Finance
Expert: Who
knows where we are now?
CHILD: America, Virginia,
Washington, D.C.,
at the bank.
PAUL SOLMAN: What does a bank
do?
CHILD: A bank gives you money
and stuff.
BETH KOBLINER: They just hand it
out?
CHILD: I think so.
PAUL SOLMAN: Where does the bank
get money?
CHILD: I think it gets it from a
sock.
BETH KOBLINER: From a sock?
PAUL SOLMAN: A sock?
Personal finance guru Beth
Kobliner thinks
kids should be learning about
money early.
But they're not.
BETH KOBLINER: I think parents
are much more
likely to talk about sex or
drugs or alcohol
with their children than they
are about money.
PAUL SOLMAN: Kobliner hopes to
break the taboo
with a new book, "Make Your Kid
a Money Genius,"
that continues work she's been
doing for years.
Kobliner has been teaching key
concepts in
economics. She insists kids can
learn them
young.
BETH KOBLINER: By age 3,
children can understand
basic money concepts like
exchange, or we
have to make choices, or things
have a value.
And those conversations are
important to start
when kids are really little. By
age 7, a lot
of those behaviors to do with
money, whether
it's self-control or delayed
gratification,
they start getting set. So,
those ages 3 to
7, it's really kind of a nice
sweet spot in
which parents should be talking
to their kids
about money.
PAUL SOLMAN: We gathered our own
group of
kids to try it out.
How do people get money to give
to the bank?
CHILD: My mommy and daddy work
and get money.
And they buy milk for me.
PAUL SOLMAN: There you go?
And you're how old? You're? Just
3 years old.
Another key concept all kids
should know,
says Kobliner: what it means to
work for a
living, like here at the
"NewsHour."
BETH KOBLINER: You bring your
kid to your
office, and they see where you
work. This
woman I know, she said her dad
would leave
every morning when she was
little with a newspaper
under his arm. And she thought,
oh, my dad's
job is reading the newspaper
every day.
And then years later, she found
out, oh, he's
a teacher. Parents say, you know
how hard
I worked to make money for you?
And kids are
like, oh, I guess so.
PAUL SOLMAN: Kobliner also
advises teaching
kids to internalize the
nonmaterial payoffs
from work by having them do
some.
BETH KOBLINER: Having a child do
chores at
a really young age, we're
talking about household
chores, putting your dishes in
the sink, putting
it in the dishwasher, putting
your clothes
in the hamper, that type of
thing at an early
ages of 3, 4, 5 years old was
one predictor
of success in life.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like getting a
degree or starting
a career.
Kobliner also touts a trendy
gimmick for teaching
kids the uses of money.
BETH KOBLINER: There are three
different jars
here. One is for...
CHILDREN: Savings.
BETH KOBLINER: This one is for?
CHILDREN: Spending.
BETH KOBLINER: And this one is
for?
CHILDREN: Sharing.
PAUL SOLMAN: The key concept
here, opportunity
cost. If you spend, you don't
have the opportunity
to save or share.
BETH KOBLINER: Which do you want
to do? Do
you want to save it?
CHILD: Share it.
BETH KOBLINER: You want to share
it? What
would you do? You can either
save it...
CHILD: Oh, my gosh. I know which
one.
BETH KOBLINER: Which one? Tell
me.
CHILD: I'm under the table.
BETH KOBLINER: Spend.
PAUL SOLMAN: Where are you,
Vera?
CHILD: I'm under the table.
PAUL SOLMAN: Those of you who
ducked out of
econ lectures in school might
sympathize with
Vera's time-out moment.
But the professor, unfazed,
pushed on.
BETH KOBLINER: So, why do you
want to spend
it? What would you spend it on?
CHILD: Minecraft toys.
BETH KOBLINER: Minecraft toys.
Oh.
PAUL SOLMAN: Whitleigh Wilks
(ph) decided
to put one dollar in each of the
jars.
BETH KOBLINER: That's very
interesting. Why
did you do that?
CHILD: Because I want to do all,
all three
in here.
BETH KOBLINER: In savings? Wow.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what are you
saving for?
CHILD: College. College and high
school.
PAUL SOLMAN: Teaching kids to
save, says Kobliner,
was just teaching them to wait,
as in the
famous marshmallow experiment.
WOMAN: All right, here's the
deal. Marshmallow
for you. You can either wait,
and I will give
you another one if you wait. You
can either
eat it right now, or you can
wait. Either
way.
PAUL SOLMAN: We ran our own
mental version.
Suppose I had a marshmallow in
front of you
now and I said, if you don't eat
it for 15
minutes...
CHILD: I would eat it.
PAUL SOLMAN: You would eat it
right away,
even though I say I would give
you two later?
CHILD: Mm-hmm.
PAUL SOLMAN: You would eat it
right -- what
would you do?
CHILD: I would wait a little
while.
PAUL SOLMAN: Could you wait?
CHILD: Yes. I would play with my
LEGOs. If
there was a fire, I would just
cook it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, no
marshmallow toasting
in the actual experiment. Kids
were left alone
in a room with the mouthwatering
morsel right
in front of them. In follow-up
studies, those
who waited longer actually fared
better in
life.
BETH KOBLINER: They had 200
points on average
higher on their SATs. They had
better interpersonal
relationships, and even had
lower body mass
indexes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
BETH KOBLINER: It feels at first
like, oh,
it's because these kids have
this strong moral
fiber.
PAUL SOLMAN: And higher I.Q. or
something.
BETH KOBLINER: And they're able
to resist
it.
But we also know now it's more
the ability
to distract themselves. That's
an important
trait to have. People who are
able to have
impulse control or delayed
gratification are
able to save more money.
PAUL SOLMAN: But how to
encourage kids to
delay gratification?
Start, says Kobliner, by not
giving in to
every demand.
BETH KOBLINER: You know, we're
going to go
into the store right now and
we're only getting
things we need.
Research is showing, when you
say yes all
the time, all the time, all the
time, you
are basically making it harder
for your kid
to experience impulse control,
just like another
study found those kids were more
likely to
be in debt problems because they
always got
what they wanted when they
wanted it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Beth is going to
give you some
real money.
Last stop, a bakery near
"NewsHour" offices
in Arlington, Virginia.
BETH KOBLINER: You want to save
it, share
it, or spend it?
PAUL SOLMAN: We gave each kid
$3.
BETH KOBLINER: What do you want
to do?
CHILD: I will share it.
BETH KOBLINER: You want to share
it? Who are
you going to share it with?
CHILD: With him.
BETH KOBLINER: Oh.
PAUL SOLMAN: With me? Oh, that
is so sweet,
Vera.
Turns out, however, that the
allure of an
almost-$3 dollar cupcake was
irresistible.
Ultimately, everyone succumbed,
providing
Kobliner with a segue to another
of her concepts.
BETH KOBLINER: Is it better to
buy things
with a credit card or with
dollar money, paper
money?
CHILD: Dollar money.
CHILD: I would do credit card.
PAUL SOLMAN: Credit card? You
think credit
card is better?
CHILD: I think it's better to
use a credit
card, so you can save money.
PAUL SOLMAN: You won't be
surprised to hear
that Kobliner recommends cash,
so kids are
aware they're actually spending
when they
buy something.
BETH KOBLINER: They don't see
cash any more.
They see cards being swiped and
phones now
being swiped with Venmo and
Apple pay and
all these ways of paying for
things.
An MIT study found that when
people use a
card, they spend up to twice as
much then
when they use cash.
PAUL SOLMAN: As for paying off
credit cards
to avoid interest, OK, hold that
until middle
school.
Of course, Kobliner acknowledges
that teaching
econ to tots isn't always easy.
Why do you now think it's better
to buy with
cash than a credit card?
CHILD: Because -- because, like
-- I don't
know.
PAUL SOLMAN: But why not start
trying sooner,
rather than later?
Can I have a bite of yours too?
Sometimes, the results can be
simply delicious.
Mmm. Thank you so much.
This is economics correspondent
Paul Solman.
CHILD: And he is reporting from
Best Buns
Bakery.
PAUL SOLMAN: Oh, delicious.
CHILD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular series, where we
ask people
about their passions.
Well before the recent worldwide
women's general
strike, award-winning actress
Kathleen Turner
has been advocating for women's
equality.
Her new book is "Send Yourself
Roses."
QUESTION: My favorite line in
film is something
that you said in "Body Heat."
KATHLEEN TURNER, Actress: Oh. I
know the one.
"You're not too smart, are you?
I like that
in a man."
When I came to New York, I
wanted to be a
Broadway star. I always sort of
thought film
happened to me. I thought, OK,
better learn
this quick. "Body Heat" was my
first film.
I was 25 when they cast me.
I think it's probably
everybody's favorite
moment when he smashes the
window in. Come
on. That's hot.
I certainly like to push the
envelope, if
not tear it. Most of my films
are new territory.
If you look at "Crimes of
Passion," that was
certainly unheard of. The comedy
in "The Man
With Two Brains."
In 1990, I decided then to go
back to Broadway
to do "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,"
and, yes, I
got calls from Michael Douglas,
Jack Nicholson,
to say, don't do it, don't do
it. You will
have this big target on your
back. You know,
they think of you as a movie
star, and they
will be out to get you on the
stage. My answer
was, no, you don't understand.
I'm better
on stage.
When I get very nervous or
something, my response
is to get cocky. When doing
theater, you are
in a performance mode, right up
through 11:00
at night. Everything you do is
about that
curtain going up at 8:00.
And it is addictively alive. I
have said that
I am no good at playing victims.
I don't believe
I have ever thought of it as the
enforcer
role, decisive perhaps,
assertive. What would
be called decisive certainly in
a male role
is probably called difficult in
a woman, which
is really, you know, stupid.
Forty percent of the American
families are,
the woman is the major
breadwinner. Take that.
Years ago, in all my speeches, I
would propose
a woman's stop day. Don't go to
the office.
Don't show up on the set. Just
sit down. Certainly,
we would show everyone our value
to the country,
but, maybe more important, we
would show ourselves.
My name is Kathleen Turner, and
this is my
Brief But Spectacular take on my
body of work
to date. I'm not done yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what a voice.
You can watch additional Brief
But Spectacular
episodes on our Web site. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.